Improve locking mechanism for parachains (#14)
polkadot-fellows/RFCs: text/0014-improve-locking-mechanism-for-parachains.md

# RFC-0014: Improve locking mechanism for parachains

|                 |                                          |
| --------------- | ---------------------------------------- |
| **Start Date**  | July 25, 2023                            |
| **Description** | Improve locking mechanism for parachains |
| **Authors**     | Bryan Chen                               |

## Summary

> The manager of a parachain have the permission to manage the parachain when the parachain is unlocked. Parachain is by default locked when onboarded on a slot. This requires the parachain wasm/genesis must be valid otherwise a root track governance action on relaychain is required to update the parachain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The manager of a parachain has permission to manage the parachain when the parachain is unlocked. Parachains are by default locked when onboarded to a slot. This requires the parachain wasm/genesis must be valid, otherwise a root track governance action on relaychain is required to update the parachain.
```

Reviewer: This summary is 99% about the problem, not about the solution. It should be more about the solution.

> This RFC proposes a mechanism to allow parachain manager self-service the parachain without root track governance action.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This RFC proposes a mechanism to allow a parachain manager to self-service the parachain without root track governance action.
```

The key scenarios this RFC seeks to improve are:

1. Rescue a parachain with invalid wasm/genesis.

While we have various resources and templates to build a new parachain, it is still not a trivial task. It is very easy to make a mistake and resulting an invalid wasm/genesis. With lack of tools to help detect those issues[^1], it is very likely that the issues are only discovered after the parachain is onboarded on a slot. In this case, the parachain is locked and the parachain team has to go through a lengthy governance process to rescue the parachain.

2. Perform lease renewal for an existing parachain.

One way to perform lease renewal for a parachain is by perform a least swap with another parachain with longer lease. This requires the other parachain must be operational and able to perform XCM transact call into relaychain to dispatch the swap call. Combined with the overhead of setting up a new parachain, this is an time consuming and expensive process. Ideally, the parachain manager should be able to perform the lease swap call without having a running parachain[^2].

> 

Reviewer: Could you add some hard requirements in MUST/SHOULD terms?

Author: added

## Stakeholders

- Parachain teams

> ## Explanation

Reviewer: Describe which areas of the runtime will be altered - pallets, interfaces, XCM calls, origins?

Author: I am not exactly sure what to put for those without making this too much implementation details. This doesn't alter public interfaces and which pallet to modify shouldn't matter.

> A parachain can either be locked or unlocked[^3]. With parachain locked, the parachain manager does not have any privileges. With parachain unlocked, the parachain manager can perform various actions such as updating the wasm/genesis, perform lease swap, etc.

Reviewer: Be specific about all the actions that the parachain manager can perform

Author: in status quo section

> A parachain is automatically locked once it is onboarded on a slot[^4].

Reviewer: Would you mind expanding this somewhat beyond parachain slots, i.e. a general description of locking/unlocking functionality. And then a section on how this is used in crowdloans. That would be more future-proof.

Author: added a status quo section

Only the relaychain Root origin or the parachain itself can unlock the lock[^5].

This creates an issue that if the parachain is unable to produce block, the parachain manager is unable to do anything and have to rely on relaychain Root origin to manage the parachain.

> This RFC proposes to automatically ignore the lock status of the parachain with either of the conditions:

Reviewer: Needs more details - should a new `Call` be added to bypass the lock, which checks these conditions?

The implementation of this RFC will be tested on testnets (Rococo and Westend) first.

An audit maybe required to ensure the implementation does not introduce unwanted side effects.

There is no privacy related concerns.

### Performance

This RFC should not introduce any performance impact.

### Ergonomics

This RFC should improve the developer experiences for new and existing parachain teams

### Compatibility

This RFC is fully compatibility with existing interfaces.

## Prior Art and References

- Parachain Slot Extension Story: https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot/issues/4758
- Allow parachain to renew lease without actually run another parachain: https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot/issues/6685
- Always treat parachain that never produced block for a significant amount of time as unlocked: https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot/issues/7539

## Unresolved Questions

How long should we wait before considering a parachain is unable to produce block? It should not be too long otherwise will defects the purpose of this RFC. It should not be too short otherwise will introduce centralization risk. It is proposed to be 7 days.

## Future Directions and Related Material

> Everything this RFC touches should be gone in the future once coretime related changes are implemented and therefore future considerations are not applicable.

Reviewer: I do not believe this is true - while we will blur the distinction between parachains with and without slots, the `paras`, `paras_registrar`, and other mechanisms will remain, albeit with some alterations.

Author: We need a better generalized long term solution which will repalce this one.

## Stakeholders

- Parachain teams

## Explanation

A parachain can either be locked or unlocked[^3]. With parachain locked, the parachain manager does not have any priviledges. With parachain unlocked, the parachain manager can perform various actions such as updating the wasm/genesis, perform lease swap, etc.

A parachain is automatically locked once it is onboarded on a slot[^4].

Only the relaychain Root origin or the parachain itself can unlock the lock[^5].

This creates an issue that if the parachain is unable to produce block, the parachain manager is unable to do anything and have to rely on relaychain Root origin to manage the parachain.

This RFC proposes to automatically ignore the lock status of the parachain with either of the conditions:

1. The wasm and genesis state are both empty.

> 2. The parachain is considered unable to perform block using the following hueuristic:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. The parachain is considered unable to create a block using the following hueuristic:
```
